Complete Course Structure
Module 1: Exception Handling (100% Complete)
Introduction to Exception Handling
Errors vs Exceptions
Throwable Class Hierarchy
Types of Exceptions
Checked Exceptions
Unchecked Exceptions
Built-in Exceptions
Exception Propagation
try Block
catch Block
finally Block
Multiple catch
Nested try-catch
Multi-catch (Java 7)
throw Keyword
throws Keyword
Custom Exceptions
User-defined Exceptions
Chained Exceptions
try-with-resources
AutoCloseable Interface
Stack Trace
Assertions
Best Practices
Common Mistakes
Real-world Examples
JDBC Exception Handling
Exception Handling in Spring Boot
100+ Interview Questions
Practice Programs

Chapter 1: Introduction to Exception Handling

What is Exception Handling?Imagine you're writing a Java program.Everything is working perfectly until suddenly:User enters 
a letter instead of a number.File you're trying to read doesn't exist.Database connection fails.Internet connection drops.
Memory becomes full.Should the program immediately stop?If yes,the user loses everything.Instead,Java provides Exception 
Handling, which allows the program to detect, report, and (where appropriate) recover from unexpected problems.
Definition:Exception Handling is a mechanism in Java for detecting, handling, and recovering from runtime problems so that 
the normal flow of the program can continue whenever possible.It separates normal business logic from error-handling logic, 
making programs more robust and easier to maintain.

Why Do We Need Exception Handling?Suppose you write this program:
public class Demo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int a = 10;
        int b = 0;
        int c = a / b;
        System.out.println(c);
        System.out.println("Program End");
    }
}
Output:Exception in thread "main" java.lang.ArithmeticException: / by zero
Notice that:System.out.println("Program End"); never executes.The JVM immediately terminates the program because the 
exception was not handled.Without Exception Handling
Program Starts
      │
      ▼
Execute Statement
      │
      ▼
Exception Occurs
      │
      ▼
Program Terminates

BUT With Exception Handling:
Program Starts
      │
      ▼
Execute Statement
      │
      ▼
Exception Occurs
      │
      ▼
Catch Exception
      │
      ▼
Continue Program
This is the fundamental purpose of exception handling.Real-Life Example:Imagine you're driving a car.Without brakes:
Obstacle
↓
Accident
↓
Journey Ends

With brakes:
Obstacle
↓
Brake Applied
↓
Avoid Accident
↓
Journey Continues
Exception Handling acts like the braking system of a program.It doesn't prevent every problem from occurring, 
but it gives your program a controlled way to respond.

Another Real-Life Example is Suppose you're using an ATM.
Scenario:You insert your ATM card.Enter the PIN.Request ₹5,000.But the ATM has no cash.
Without exception handling:ATM Crashes and/or Screen Turns Off.With exception handling:Sorry!Insufficient Cash.
Please try another ATM.The application continues to work gracefully.

What Exactly is an Exception?An exception is an object that represents an abnormal condition occurring during the 
execution of a program.Many beginners think an exception is just an error message.That's incorrect.An exception is an object.
When something goes wrong, Java creates an object containing information about the problem.For example:int a = 10;int b = 0;
System.out.println(a / b);
Java internally creates an object similar to:ArithmeticException exception = new ArithmeticException("/ by zero");
This object stores details such as:Exception type,Error message,Location of the error,Call stack.

Life Cycle of an Exception:Whenever an exception occurs, Java follows a sequence.
Statement Executes
↓
Problem Occurs
↓
JVM Creates Exception Object
↓
JVM Searches for Handler
↓
Found?
├── YES → Handle Exception → Continue
└── NO → Program Terminates
This sequence is one of the most commonly asked interview topics.

Who Creates Exception Objects?There are two possibilities.
1. JVM Creates It
Example:int x = 10 / 0;The JVM automatically creates:ArithmeticException
2. Programmer Creates It:Using the throw keyword:throw new ArithmeticException("Invalid Input");

Where Can Exceptions Occur?Almost anywhere.Examples include:
Arithmetic:int x = 10 / 0;

Array:int[] arr = new int[5];
System.out.println(arr[10]);

String:String s = null;
System.out.println(s.length());

File:FileReader reader =new FileReader("abc.txt");
If abc.txt doesn't exist, an exception occurs.

Database:Connection con =DriverManager.getConnection(...);
If the database server is unavailable or credentials are wrong, an exception is thrown.

